# Liturgical Calendar
A PHP script that will generate the liturgical calendar for any given year, based on the General Roman Calendar, calculating the mobile festivities and the precedence of solemnities, feasts, memorials... This script serves as a data endpoint, which will generate the data for the General Roman Calendar in a data exchange format, such as JSON, XML, or ICS. An example of the endpoint can be found at https://johnromanodorazio.com/LiturgicalCalendar/, at the first link on the page [*data generation endpoint here*](https://johnromanodorazio.com/LiturgicalCalendar/LitCalEngine.php).

Some characteristics of this endpoint:
* **The data is based on official sources**, not copied from random internet sources. Sources used are the various editions of the **Roman Missal** in Latin, English, and Italian, **Magisterial documents**, and the **Decrees of the Congregation for Divine Worship**
    - Missale Romanum, Editio typica, 1970
    - Missale Romanum, Reimpressio emendata, 1971
    - Missale Romanum, Editio typica secunda, 1975
    - Missale Romanum, Editio typica tertia, 2002
    - Missale Romanum, Editio typica tertia emendata, 2008
    - [Mysterii Paschalis, PAULUS PP. VI, 1969](http://www.vatican.va/content/paul-vi/la/motu_proprio/documents/hf_p-vi_motu-proprio_19690214_mysterii-paschalis.html)
    - [Decrees of the Congregation of Divine Worship](https://www.vatican.va/roman_curia/congregations/ccdds/index_it.htm)
* **The data is historically accurate**, *i.e.* the liturgical calendar produced for the year 1979 will reflect the calendar as it was in that year, and not as it would be today (obviously future years will reflect the calendar as it is generated in the current year; as new decrees are issued by the Congregation for Divine Worship or new editions of the Roman Missal are published, the script will need to be updated to account for any new criteria)


# How to setup the endpoint yourself

### 1. Setup the database tables
  Included is an SQL dump **`liturgy.sql`** which contains database tables with fixed date festivities, memorials and optional memorials of the General Roman Calendar. The PHP script aids itself with these tables to generate the liturgical calendar along with the localized translations of the festivities. The tables themselves do not necessarily define the dates of all festivities, for example movable feasts are necessarily calculated in the script itself, in this case the tables serve only for localization purposes.
### 2. Edit the configuration file for access to the database
  Once the tables are set up in a database, the `LitCalConfig-sample.php` file must be renamed to `LitCalConfig.php` and populated with the credentials to access the database. Seeing that this file will be renamed for production, it will not be overwritten when the scripts get updated from a new release or a `git pull`.

# How to use the endpoint
There are two examples of usage of the endpoint at https://johnromanodorazio.com/LiturgicalCalendar/, in this case for generating an HTML representation of the Liturgical Calendar.

* The [first example](https://johnromanodorazio.com/LiturgicalCalendar/examples/javascript_liturgical_calendar.php) uses AJAX in Javascript to make the request to the endpoint and handle the results. 
* The [second example](https://johnromanodorazio.com/LiturgicalCalendar/examples/curl_liturgical_calendar.php) uses cURL in PHP to make a request to the endpoint and handle the results. 

Both of these examples request JSON as the data exchange format generated by the endpoint. But any application could use the endpoint in a similar manner: an Android App, a plugin for a Desktop Publishing App...

## Parameters that can be used in the request to the endpoint
* ***locale***: can have a value of *EN*, *IT*, or *LA* (*default*: *LA*). Sets the desired localization for the Calendar to *English*, *Italian*, or *Latin* respectively.
* ***year***: can have a value starting from *1970* and a maximum value of *9999* (*default*: current year). For the time being, this endpoint only calculates the Liturgical Calendar that follows the reform of the Second Vatican Council, starting from the publishing of the *Editio Typica* of the Roman Missal in 1970. Perhaps in future updates information from the calendar preceding the Second Vatican Council will be added, in order to have a greater historical range from the endpoint.
* ***returntype***: can have a value of *JSON*, *XML*, or *ICS* (*default*: *JSON*). Indicates the format of the data that will be returned by the endpoint. **N.B.** the desired data type should also be detected from the `Accept header` set by the requesting client, if not indicated by means of the `returntype` parameter; in this case, possible values are `application/json`, `application/xml`, and `text/calendar`
* ***epiphany***: can have a value of *SUNDAY_JAN2_JAN8* or *JAN6* (*default*: *JAN6*). Indicates whether Epiphany should fall exactly on January 6th or instead on the Sunday between January 2nd and January 8th. Traditionally it falls on January 6th in the Vatican, but each regional Conference of Bishops can opt to celebrate on the Sunday.
* ***ascension***: can have a value of *THURSDAY* or *SUNDAY* (*default*: *SUNDAY*). Indicates whether the feast of the Ascension should fall on a Thursday or on a Sunday. Traditionally in the Vatican it falls on a Thursday, but for pastoral reasons each regional Conference of Bishops can opt to celebrate on Sunday.
* ***corpuschristi***: can have a value of *THURSDAY* or *SUNDAY* (*default*: *SUNDAY*). Indicates whether the feast of Corpus Christi should fall on a Thursday or on a Sunday. Traditionally in the Vatican it falls on a Thursday, but for pastoral reasons each regional Conference of Bishops can opt to celebrate on Sunday.

**N.B.** The parameter names are expected to be in lowercase characters. The parameter values are generally expected to be in uppercase characters, but they will work in lowercase characters just as well (starting from v2.5).

A sample request to the endpoint could look like this:

https://johnromanodorazio.com/LiturgicalCalendar/LitCalEngine.php?year=2020&epiphany=SUNDAY_JAN2_JAN8&ascension=SUNDAY&corpuschristi=SUNDAY&returntype=JSON&locale=EN

If no parameters are given, the default values indicated above will be used.

Both **POST** and **GET** requests can be made.

## Using the endpoint as a calendar URL for Calendar Apps
* **GOOGLE CALENDAR**: you can only add a calendar by URL from Google Calendar on a computer, I don't believe it is possible from a smartphone. At the bottom left corner of the screen, next to **Other calendars**, click on the **+** to add a new calendar and choose **From URL**. Paste in the URL of the endpoint with the desired parameters, (make sure you use **ICS** as value of the *returntype* parameter). And remember, if you omit the *year* parameter, it will use the current year. This should mean that as Google Calendar continues to poll the calendar URL (supposedly every 8 hours), on the turn of a new year new events should be created automatically for the new year. Once the calendar has been added from a computer, it should become available for the same gmail account on the Google Calendar app on a smartphone.
* **iPhone Calendar**: go to **Settings** -> **Accounts** -> **Add account** -> **Other** -> **Add Calendar**, and paste in the endpoint URL with the desired parameters, (make sure you use **ICS** as value of the *returntype* parameter). And remember, if you omit the *year* parameter, it will use the current year. This should mean that as the iPhone Calendar continues to poll the calendar URL, on the turn of a new year new events should be created automatically for the new year.
* **Outlook** *(tested with Outlook 2013)*: at the bottom of the screen, switch from **Email** view to **Calendar** view. On the ribbon of the **Home** menu item, click on **Open calendar** -> **From the internet**. Paste the endpoint URL with the desired parameters, (make sure you use **ICS** as value of the *returntype* parameter). And remember, if you omit the *year* parameter, it will use the current year. On the following screen, check the checkbox along the lines of "Poll this calendar in the interval suggested by the creator", which would mean that Outlook Calendar should the calendar URL once a day. This means that without the *year* parameter, on the turn of a new year new events should be created automatically for the new year. Make sure the Calendar is created in the **Other calendars** folder; if you find it under the **Personal calendars** folder, drag it and drop it onto the **Other calendars** folder, this should ensure that it is treated as a subscription internet calendar. You can manually trigger an update from the calendar URL by clicking on **Send/receive all** (from the **SEND/RECEIVE** menu item). One highlight of the calendar in Outlook is that it supports a minimal amount of HTML in the event description, so the event descriptions in the Liturgical Calendar are a little bit more "beautified" for Outlook.

## Structure of the data returned by requests to the endpoint
For simplicity we will only take into consideration the structure of a response with JSON data.
Two object keys are returned:
1. **`LitCal`**: has a value which is an object who's key => value pairs reflect the liturgical events generated for the calendar requested. Example value of the `LitCal' key (limited to two of the generated events):
```javascript
  "LitCal":{
    "MotherGod":{
      "name":"SOLLEMNITAS SANCTAE DEI GENITRICIS MARIAE",
      "color":"white",
      "type":"fixed",
      "grade":6,
      "common":"",
      "date":"1577836800",
      "liturgicalyear":"ANNUM A"
    },
    "StsBasilGreg":{
      "name":"Sancti Basilii Magni et Gregorii Nazianzeni, episcoporum et Ecclesiae doctorum",
      "color":"white",
      "type":"fixed",
      "grade":3,
      "common":"Proper",
      "date":"1577923200"
    }
  }
```
Each of the events generated is represented as an object whose key => value pairs give the necessary information about the liturgical event:
  * `name`   : A localized string with the full name of the liturgical event ready for display
  * `color`  : The liturgical color associated with this liturgical event
  * `type`   : The type of celebration, whether *fixed* or *mobile* (*fixed* celebrations have the same date every year, *mobile* celebrations are calculated either based on the date of Easter or because they always fall on the same day of the week within a specific time frame)
  * `grade`  : The grade of the celebration. This is represented as a number from 0 to 7, giving the logical importance in order to calculate precedence compared to other possible events. The importance or precedence value will determine whether one event may suppress another event or have it moved to the next possible open slot according to certain criteria. A general association with liturgical terminology could be something like this:
    - 0 = WEEKDAY
    - 1 = COMMEMORATION
    - 2 = OPTIONAL MEMORIAL
    - 3 = MEMORIAL
    - 4 = FEAST
    - 5 = FEAST OF THE LORD
    - 6 = SOLEMNITY
    - 7 = event that has precedence over a solemnity
    
  However this association is not suitable for displaying the actual grade of the festivity in liturgical terms, because some events have a logical importance that does not correspond with their portrayed grade, for example "All Souls Day" is called a "Commemoration" and yet it is given the same importance as a solemnity. Thus "All Souls Day" will have a grade of 6, but should be displayed as "Commemoration" rather than as "Solemnity". Perhaps a future update to the engine will add a "displayGrade" property with the actual liturgical grade associated with the event, suitable for display.
  * `common` : Indicates whether the liturgical texts for the celebration (in the case of memorials of saints) can be found in the Proper of Saints in the Roman Missal, or whether in the various Commons. In the former case the value will be simply `Proper`, in the latter case there will be a more complex construct:
    - if it is possible to use liturgical texts from more than one common, the multiple possible commons will be separated by a pipe character `|`
    - within each possible common, there are multiple choices of texts according to the specific category of persons. The common and the specific category will be separated by a colon `:`
  An example value of the `common` property: `"Pastors:For a Bishop|Doctors"`. This means that it is possible to choose the liturgical texts either from the *Common of Pastors* or from the *Common of Doctors*; in the former case, the liturgical texts should be taken from the specific category *For a Bishop*. A textual representation ready for display would be something like this: *From the common of Pastors: For a Bishop; or from the Common of Doctors*. Please refer to the example scripts, whether the PHP example or the Javascript example, in order to understand better how to handle the interpretation and localization of these values, with all possible cases. 
  * `date`   : a PHP style unix timestamp in UTC time. The actual time (hours, minutes, seconds) should be a zero value seeing that we deal only with all day events, and time is not of importance. For use in **Javascript**, multiply this value by 1000, because Javascript uses `milliseconds` whereas **PHP** uses `seconds` as a base for a UNIX timestamp. The timestamp value should be dealt with accordingly in each programming language used: as is if the language uses seconds as a base, or multiplying by 1000 if it uses milliseconds as a base.
2. **`Settings`**: has a value which is an object who's key => value pairs reflect the settings used in the request to produce this specific calendar. These are useful more or less just as feedback so that we can be sure that the calendar was effectively produced with the requesting settings. Example value of the `Settings` key:
```javascript
  "Settings":{
    "YEAR":2020,
    "EPIPHANY":"JAN6",
    "ASCENSION":"SUNDAY",
    "CORPUSCHRISTI":"SUNDAY",
    "LOCALE":"LA",
    "returntype":"JSON"
  }
```

# CHANGELOG

## [v2.6]() (July 26th 2020)
 * integrate the calculation of the liturgical cycle (YEAR A,B for festivities and YEAR I,II,II for weekdays) directly into the engine, so that applications that take care of elaborating the data for display don't have to worry about it
 * update both examples, PHP and Javascript, to use the new `liturgicalyear` property returned in the JSON data, and bring Javascript example up to par with the PHP example (add month cell that spans all events for that month)

## [v2.5](https://github.com/JohnRDOrazio/LiturgicalCalendar/releases/tag/v2.5) (July 25th 2020)
 * make sure all endpoint parameters can have values with either uppercase or lowercase characters
 * fix a few small issues with the ICS data generation

## [v2.4](https://github.com/JohnRDOrazio/LiturgicalCalendar/releases/tag/v2.4) (July 24th 2020)
 * move as many festivities as possible to the MySQL tables to allow for localization (mobile feasts will be calculated in the script, but still need to be localized)
 * add ICS data generation (requires more localization strings, because it is already a form of final display of the data)

## [v2.0](https://github.com/JohnRDOrazio/LiturgicalCalendar/releases/tag/1.0) (January 8th 2018)
 * separate the display logic from the engine, so that the engine can act as an endpoint
 * make the engine return JSON or XML data that the display logic can use to generate a user-friendly representation of the data

## [v1.0](https://github.com/JohnRDOrazio/LiturgicalCalendar/releases/tag/1.0) (July 26th 2017)
 * proof of concept for the correct generation of a liturgical calendar
 * create MySQL table for the Proper of the Saints
